# DandDOntology

# Scope

This Dungeons and Dragons ontology was created by Kelsi Godin for INFO 6540. It was created based on the 5th edition of the Player’s Handbook for Dungeons and Dragons, a role-playing game in which players create characters and go adventuring with other characters. When building a character, players must choose multiple properties that impact their character’s alignment, proficiency with certain items, appearance, and background. These properties are the focal point of this ontology. Armour and weapons are also included in this ontology because they are built into the character properties of the game. Different character properties, such as race, will give characters proficiency with certain types of armour and weapons. This ontology has also allowed for multiclassing to occur. This means that characters can have multiple classes instead of only one. This is an optional feature.

For the sake of this assignment, the scope of the ontology has been limited to include 3 main classes: Character, CharacterProperty, and Item. Dungeons and Dragons is a very complex game with many options to choose from, many of which are customizable. I decided not to include options that change very frequently or are highly customizable, as the Player’s Handbook only provides suggestions about these traits or properties rather than rules. Some of these options that were not included are hit points, ability scores, feats, and spells. Most of these are obtained as characters change levels and are chosen from a large list of possibilities. Sample characters were also not created for this assignment as a large variety of characters can be created. However, the ontology could be expanded to include all of this information. For example, a magic property could be added with subclasses for divine and arcane magic that include all the corresponding spells.  

The scope of this ontology only examined armour and weapons as items. There are many other types of items that characters can have, such as travelling equipment. The full list of equipment is extensive and does not have much of an effect on creating characters; therefore, it was not included. 

# Class Structure

The classes within this ontology are set up in a hierarchical structure with a maximum of 4 levels. The Character class does not have any subclasses. CharacterProficiency has 4 subclasses. These subclasses are further divided into additional subclasses, some of which also have subclasses. For example, Race is divided into all the main races and then some races are also divided into subraces. All sibling classes within the ontology are disjoint because there is no overlap between sibling classes.

# Object Properties

Object properties were established to define the relationships between the various classes. Functional relationships included hasRace, hasBackground, and hasAlignment. These are functional because a character can only have one of them, unlike with character class (due to multiclassing). The inverses of these object properties are, therefore, inverse functional in nature (isRaceOf, isBackgroundOf, isAlignmentOf). 

In the case of object properties that are not functional, such as hasClass, hasProficiencyWith, and wieldsWeapon, the domains and ranges are not the same, meaning they are not symmetric or reflexive in nature. They are also not transitive for this reason. However, they are asymmetric and irreflexive. Irreflexive means a class is not related to itself by any of these object properties. Meanwhile, asymmetric means the same object property cannot be used to relate one class to another class in both directions. For example, CharacterClass does not have a class because it is a class. Also, the relationship CharacterClass hasClass Character does not make sense. The inverses of these object properties are also asymmetric and irreflexive.

For armour, the object property wearsArmour does not fall into any of the characteristic categories provided. A character does not have to wear armour. In fact, some characters cannot wear armour.

# Annotations

Annotations were added to the classes and subclasses in order to enrich the metadata of the ontology. Once again, some traits are only suggestions and are highly customizable, so annotation properties were not created for these traits. Others are beyond the scope of the project because they were not included in the classes of the ontology. Tools were not included in the scope; therefore, an annotation property for tool proficiencies was not deemed necessary. Other traits, such as alignment and weapons proficiencies, were included in the ontology as classes rather than annotation properties.

Annotation properties impacting characters, armour, and weapons were all added. Characters are highly impacted by their race, which determines their size, speed, some of the languages they speak, and the abilities they are most proficient in. Annotation properties for these traits were added. Background can also impact the languages spoken by a character, so this annotation property was also used under the Background class. Armour and weapons both cost money and weigh certain amounts. These features are very important for game play, as characters buy and sell items, and the weight of an item may determine whether or not a character can use it. Armour also includes an annotation property for armour class, which impacts the amount of protection a character gains from wearing a particular piece of armour. Weapons include a damage annotation property, which tells the player how much damage a particular weapon does when it is used to attack another creature/character. While weapons are also categorized by their properties, these properties are included in the individual weapon definitions. These properties include such things as finesse, versatile, and thrown.
